Title: When Vocal Tone and Literal Meaning Diverge: An Acoustic-Semantic Incongruity Study for Large Audio-Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.28966v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 00:21:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
## When Vocal Tone and Literal Meaning Diverge: An Acoustic–Semantic Incongruity Study for Large Audio–Language Models 

Yu-Wen Chen 1,* William Ho 1,* Maxim Topaz 2 Zoran Kostic 1 Julia Hirschberg 11The Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Science, Columbia University, USA 

> 2

School of Nursing, Columbia University, USA 

{yu-wen.chen, william.ho}@columbia.edu 

Abstract 

Affective cues across modalities may be incon-gruous (e.g., sarcasm or mocking praise), poten-tially leading to misinterpretation when relying on a single modality. Large Audio–Language Models (LALMs) have recently gained pop-ularity and been applied to multimodal emo-tion recognition, but their ability to disentangle acoustic and semantic cues, especially in incon-gruent cases, remains underexplored. To ad-dress this gap, we introduce CREMA-ASIS, a dataset specifically created to investigate incon-gruence between acoustic emotion and seman-tic sentiment cues. It pairs acoustic emotion la-bels with semantic sentiment polarities. Using this dataset, we evaluate LALM biases within a multitask framework and conduct a layer-wise analysis to identify modality dominance across layers. Our findings reveal that LALMs strug-gle with semantic-acoustic incongruent cases, rarely predicting incongruity, and that LALMs are predominantly influenced by semantic infor-mation. However, supervised fine-tuning sig-nificantly improves LALM performance on our CREMA-ASIS test set while preserving tran-scription accuracy and joint emotion recogni-tion. Results demonstrate potential for enhanc-ing both acoustic and semantic understanding on out-of-domain data. 

1 Introduction 

Human affect is naturally conveyed through multi-ple modalities, including speech and text. Captur-ing emotional cues from both modalities provides deeper insight into the intent of the speaker (Du et al., 2025). Recent advances in Large Au-dio–Language Models (LALMs) have attracted in-creasing attention, enabling a unified framework supporting multiple audio-text tasks within a single model, including emotion recognition (Chu et al., 2024; Ding et al., 2025; Ghosh et al., 2025; Tang et al., 2024; Deshmukh et al., 2023). However, 

> *These authors contributed equally.

most studies assign a single unified emotion la-bel across modalities, thus overlooking both the heterogeneity and the complementary information provided by each. Moreover, researchers have observed that current LALMs may exhibit bias toward textual descriptions. For example, Wang et al. (2025) showed that LALMs tend to prioritize textual information in prompts over acoustic evi-dence when the sources conflict. Beyond prompt-audio conflicts, mismatches can occur within the audio signal itself when acoustic and semantic con-tent diverge. Such mismatches frequently occur in real-world communication, as in sarcasm, mocking praise, or concealed sadness. Dominance of one modality can bias interpretation, leading listeners to misread or overlook the speaker’s true intent. Recent studies have begun exploring LALM bias in emotion recognition. Chen et al. (2026) inves-tigated how different instructions (listening, read-ing, or both) affect LALM performance on emo-tion classification. Corrêa et al. (2026) evaluated LALMs using audio samples generated by a text-to-speech (TTS) system from GPT-generated sen-tences and speech emotion samples. Both studies observe a consistent lexical dominance. However, these studies mainly highlight LALMs’ bias toward semantic cues in audio, without further exploring potential strategies for mitigating this behavior. In addition, the datasets used in both works are lim-ited, making them insufficient to guide models to disentangle acoustic and semantic cues. While pre-vious studies focus on single-task settings, a more challenging yet practical approach is a multitask framework that generates separate predictions for each modality, enabling finer-grained analysis of speaker intent through comparison of modality-specific affective cues. While prior work uses emotion categories or sen-timent scores for both modalities, we consider pair-ing acoustic emotion categories (e.g., happy, angry) with semantic sentiment labels (positive, neutral, arXiv:2608.28966v1 [eess.AS] 29 Aug 2026 negative), which provides a more appropriate and informative setting. This choice was made to dif-ferentiate between a speaker’s emotion expressed through acoustic cues and the general consensus sentiment conveyed in the semantics. For exam-ple, “He had a car accident.” can express neutral (factual), sad (sympathetic), or even happy (mali-cious) emotions; however, for the lexical meaning, the general consensus sentiment of the event is negative. Acoustic signals are represented using emotion categories rather than sentiment to better capture the richness of human expressive states. Our contributions are summarized as follows (1) We introduce CREMA-ASIS, an Acous-tic–Semantic Incongruity Study dataset built upon CREMA-D (Cao et al., 2014). The dataset is cre-ated using a state-of-the-art (SOTA) text-to-speech (TTS) system, allowing controlled manipulation of acoustic and semantic labels and enabling sys-tematic evaluation of how LALMs interpret mul-timodal affective cues. (2) We analyze the perfor-mance of several SOTA LALMs on CREMA-ASIS, revealing their strengths and limitations across vari-ous acoustic–semantic pairings. (3) Leveraging the scale of CREMA-ASIS, we conduct Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) experiments where models are trained to predict both acoustic emotion and seman-tic sentiment simultaneously. (4) We empirically demonstrate a pronounced acoustic–semantic gap in LALMs through layer-wise linear probing (Alain and Bengio, 2017) and show that SFT on CREMA-ASIS improves the linear decodability of acoustic information in deeper layers while largely preserv-ing semantic processing, narrowing the gap with-out sacrificing generalization. These findings pro-vide diagnostic insight toward understanding how LALMs represent multimodal affective cues and highlight the potential of leveraging synthetic data to mitigate the acoustic–semantic gap 1.

2 Method 

We have designed CREMA-ASIS that explicitly tar-gets affects which are inconsistent between acous-tic and semantic information, specifically when the acoustic emotional valence contradicts the seman-tic sentiment expressed in the utterance. We used the dataset both to evaluate LALMs’ biases across acoustic and semantic modalities and to improve their ability to differentiate between the two via 

> 1

Code and data: https://github.com/yuwchen/ CREMA-ASIS 

SFT. The models are instructed to perform acoustic emotion recognition and semantic sentiment pre-diction simultaneously (detailed in Appendix A.1). By explicitly pairing inconsistent acoustic and se-mantic signals, we create conditions where predict-ing acoustic emotion from lexical content alone yields systematically incorrect predictions. Suc-cessful learning therefore requires attending to and preserving acoustic features predictive of spoken emotion. Figure 1 illustrates the study overview. Semantic label Sentence      

> positive I appreciate that
> positive That is good
> positive Great job on this
> <Acoustic label: angry >
> GPT result Sentence False I appreciate that
> True.2 That is good
> False Great job on this
> Audio reference
> AER result Acoustic label TTS result angry angry
> happy angry
> TTS result Target sentence Audio reference
> I appreciate that Great job on this
> TTS
> Semantic label Acoustic label Sentence Audio (TTS result)
> positive angry I appreciate that
> Text dataset
> (1) Not positive
> (2) Inappropriate (3) Written form

x

> AER

x 

> GPT
> Data creation process
> LALM
> Identify
> acoustic emotion and
> semantic sentiment Research question:
> Can LALMs distinguish between acoustic and semantic information?

Figure 1: Study overview. The data creation process illustrates generating audio with an angry voice and positive semantic content. 

2.1 CREMA-ASIS data creation 

Recent advances in TTS systems have enabled high-quality, natural-sounding speech generation. Among several open-source models supporting emotion expression and voice-cloning (Du et al., 2024), IndexTTS2 (Zhou et al., 2026) was selected based on manual listening tests. Its voice cloning capabilities allow it to replicate tone from the refer-ence audio, enabling control of both acoustic emo-tion and semantic content in the generated speech by providing an emotion-specified reference sam-ple. 

2.1.1 Audio Reference and Sentence Selection 

We focused on emotion categories that commonly exhibit acoustic emotion which is incongruous to semantic sentiment in real-world scenarios (Ta-ble 1). Specifically, a happy vocal tone paired with negative semantics often arises when speakers use a cheerful tone to complain, mask frustration, or make jokes. A disgusted or angry tone with positive semantic content may be delivered when praise or gratitude is expressed mockingly or as an ironic commendation. Lastly, speakers may con-vey positive messages using a sad tone to conceal personal distress and avoid causing concern for the listener. We also generated data under acoustic-neutral and semantic-neutral conditions for compar-ison. CREMA-ASIS covers five acoustic emotion categories: happy, neutral, angry, disgust, and sad, and three sentiment categories: negative, neutral, and positive. Example Semantic sentiment Acoustic emotion The client canceled the entire project after we worked all weekend Negative Happy Wow, you’re a genius Positive Disgust I appreciate that Positive Angry I am fine Positive Sad 

Table 1: Acoustic–semantic incongruence scenarios. 

To generate controlled acoustic–semantic pairs, we required reference audio for each emotion cate-gory and sentences for each sentiment group. 

Audio Reference Selection: Speech emotion datasets include acted (Burkhardt et al., 2005) and spontaneous emotions (Lotfian and Busso, 2017; Bujnowski et al., 2024). While spontaneous emo-tions are more natural, we consider acted emotion datasets more appropriate for generating synthetic speech signals in this study. First, many sponta-neous emotion datasets are derived from TV shows, where licensing restrictions often limit the distribu-tion of derivative works. Second, most spontaneous datasets provide only overall labels, whereas gen-erating audio references requires labels that specif-ically reflect the acoustic signal, independent of the semantic content. In contrast, acted datasets convey emotion solely through acoustic expression, keeping the semantic content neutral. In addition, acted emotions are often more exaggerated, mak-ing them easier for models to recognize. Failure to correctly classify speech synthesized from acted emotions indicates an even greater challenge in recognizing speech from spontaneous emotions. Therefore, we opted for an acted emotion dataset. Among these, CREMA-D 2 was selected due to its relatively large number of unique speakers. Notic-ing some non-stationary noise in the dataset, we applied a speech enhancement model (Chao et al., 2024) to improve audio quality before using the samples as references in the TTS system. 

Sentence Selection: We did not use a Large-Language Model (LLM) to generate sentences be-cause it often produces similar structures and repet-itive words especially when more than a hundred of sentences are needed (Holtzman et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2025). Instead, we used sentences from the GoEmotions 3 (Demszky et al., 2020) dataset, which are collected from Reddit and in-clude human-annotated emotion categories. We focused on categories that express opinions, as acoustic–semantic incongruence often arises when people do not want to express their opinions di-rectly to mitigate social tension, avoid offending others, or employ humor and irony (Brown and Levinson, 1987). For positive semantic sentiment, we selected the approval , admiration , and grati-tude categories. For negative semantic sentiment, we selected annoyance , disapproval , and disap-pointment . Sentences in the neutral category are also included to serve as control samples. We fur-ther used GPT-4o (Hurst et al., 2024) to filter the sentences based on the following criteria: (1) The sentence does not express the target sentiment. (2) The sentence contains content that is strongly racist, very offensive, or inappropriate for public use. (3) The sentence includes words or expressions that people typically would not say aloud (i.e., phrases that exist only in written form). 

2.1.2 Acoustic Filtering of Generated Speech 

We applied an acoustic-based emotion recognition (AER) model (Yang et al., 2021) to identify and filter out samples whose conveyed emotion is un-likely to match the acoustic label. Although AER has limitations, it is effective in removing clear mismatches, e.g., when an angry target is rendered as sounding clearly happy, thereby improving the dataset’s overall emotional consistency. 

3 Experimental Settings 

3.1 Synthetic Data Generation 

We use the GoEmotions dataset as the source of spoken content, randomly selecting a subset to limit 

> 2Open Data Commons Attribution License (ODC-By) v1.0
> 3Apache License 2.0

experimental complexity and keep the size of syn-thetic data manageable. The resulting dataset con-sists of 2,255 negative, 1,944 neutral, and 2,267 positive sentences. These sentences are randomly split into training, validation, and test sets, and are randomly sampled during synthetic data genera-tion. CREMA-D is used as the acoustic reference and consists of 7,442 speech clips produced by 91 actors. Each actor performs speech expressing basic emotional states, while the spoken content is restricted to 12 emotionally neutral sentences. We follow the original training, validation, and test splits provided with the dataset. The CREMA-D dataset is processed using SEMamba (Chao et al., 2024). The AER is from Hugging Face 4. Because AER is imperfect, we retained not only samples whose recognized emotion matches the target but also those with perceptually similar emotion cat-egories (Appendix A.4). After acoustic filtering, we apply whisper-base.en (Radford et al., 2023) to transcribe the generated speech and compare it with the specified spoken content. The resulting word error rate (WER) of 0.1 indicates that IndexTTS2 can reliably generate speech that closely matches the intended text in most cases. To further ensure evaluation reliability, we exclude samples with a WER greater than 0.5 in the test set. 

3.2 Supervised Fine-Tuning 

Three well-known LALMs were evaluated in this study: Qwen2-Audio (Chu et al., 2024) (Qwen2-Audio-7B-Instruct) , Kimi-Audio (Ding et al., 2025) ( Kimi-Audio-7B-Instruct ), and Audio-Flamingo3 (Ghosh et al., 2025)( audio-flamingo-3-hf ). In addition to CREMA-ASIS, we include the original acoustic-neutral pairs from the CREMA-D and MELD (Poria et al., 2019) datasets during SFT. MELD, collected from TV series, exposes the model to more naturalistic emotional expressions, enhancing its generalizability. We use emotion and sentiment labels in MELD as acoustic emotion and semantic sentiment targets. Including these helps prevent the fine-tuned model from forgetting emo-tion categories it can initially recognize and from focusing solely on categories present in the syn-thetic data. SFT is performed using LoRA (Hu et al., 2022; Mangrulkar et al., 2022), with parame-ter settings provided in Appendix A.5. 

> 4firdhokk/speech-emotion-recognition-with-openai-whisper-large-v3

3.3 Evaluation Metric 

We report acoustic accuracy ( Acc acou , emotion classification), semantic accuracy ( Acc sem , senti-ment classification), and dual-condition accuracy (Acc dual ), which requires both predictions to be cor-rect for a single instance. In addition to CREMA-ASIS and MELD test set, we evaluate generalizabil-ity on LISTEN_full (Chen et al., 2026), where sam-ples are annotated with either acoustic or semantic emotion categories. We use its test split 5. Since LISTEN_full is collected from several open-source emotion datasets, we remove samples originating from CREMA-D and MELD to avoid domain over-lap with our training data. Labels are manually mapped to the categories used in our dataset, and samples with ambiguous mappings are excluded from evaluation (details in Appendix A.7). Af-ter filtering, we retain 1,123 samples for acoustic emotion analysis and 651 samples for semantic sentiment analysis. 

3.4 Layer-wise Acoustic-semantic Probing 

To better understand how SFT affects acoustic vs. semantic information processing, we conduct layer-wise linear probing experiments (Alain and Bengio, 2017) on the three LALMs from Sec-tion 3.2 using CREMA-ASIS. We evaluate the dis-criminative power of hidden states across model depth for acoustic emotion ( Acc acou ) and seman-tic sentiment ( Acc sem ), and analyze the acoustic-semantic gap G = |Acc acou − Acc sem |. We com-pute changes between base and SFT models as 

∆G = GSFT − Gbase (negative values indicate gap reduction), ∆Acc acou = Acc SFT acou − Acc base acou , and 

∆Acc sem = Acc SFT sem − Acc base sem .For each model, we extract representations from the audio encoder (Whisper), multi-modal projec-tor, six LLM layers spanning early, middle and late depth ([1, 2, 9, 17, 25, 32] for Qwen2-Audio’s 32 layers, [1, 2, 7, 14, 21, 28] for Kimi-Audio and Audio-Flamingo3’s 28 layers), and Kimi-Audio’s MIMO module. After mean pooling over the se-quence dimension, we train linear classifiers to independently predict one of 5 acoustic or 3 seman-tic categories. Linear probes ensure results reflect information encoded in hidden states rather than classifier capacity. Training parameter settings are given in Appendix A.6. 

> 5https://huggingface.co/datasets/VibeCheck1/ LISTEN_full/blob/main/data/test-00000-of-00001. parquet

4 Results 

4.1 CREMA-ASIS Dataset 4.1.1 Dataset Statistics and Composition 

Table 2 presents CREMA-ASIS statistics: acous-tic–semantic incongruous, congruous, and neutral-associated cases (where either or both the acous-tic or semantic label is neutral). The incongruous pairs in which semantic sentiment opposes acous-tic valence are challenging and common in real-world scenarios but underexplored in prior work. Congruous samples align acoustic and semantic cues, making them easier to recognize. Samples with exactly one neutral modality fall between in-congruous and congruous, producing partially mis-aligned signals. Including congruous and neutral-associated samples helps prevent LALM from as-suming acoustic and semantic cues are always in-consistent. Although the dataset distribution is slightly uneven due to post-processing, each cate-gory contains enough samples for effective SFT, so strict class balance was not enforced. Train Val Test Total Sample size 65534 6146 5879 77559 # of Actors 63 14 14 91 Acoustic Semantic Acoustic-semantic Incongruous disgust positive 4524 437 373 5334 angry positive 6434 575 513 7522 sad positive 3821 334 330 4485 happy negative 3919 376 358 4653 Acoustic-semantic Congruous disgust negative 4993 485 382 5860 angry negative 7100 618 549 8267 sad negative 3764 302 334 4400 happy positive 3449 376 354 4179 Neutral-associated disgust neutral 2814 284 282 3380 angry neutral 3790 379 388 4557 happy neutral 2057 217 258 2532 sad neutral 4031 384 385 4800 neutral negative 6108 534 530 7172 neutral neutral 3230 333 357 3920 neutral positive 5500 512 486 6498 

Table 2: CREMA-ASIS Dataset statistics. 

4.1.2 Subjective Human Validation of Acoustic Emotion Control 

We randomly sampled 150 instances (10 per cate-gory) from the test set for a subjective evaluation of the TTS system’s ability to reproduce the reference audio’s acoustics. Three evaluators performed two tasks: rating acoustic sentiment on a scale from –1 (negative) to 1 (positive) and assigning an acoustic emotion category. Figure 2 shows violin plots of the intended emotions of the reference audio and their corresponding subjective sentiment scores, in-dicating that median perceived sentiment aligns with the intended acoustic valence (e.g., lowest for angry, highest for happy). Accuracy of acous-tic categorical emotion recognition, computed us-ing majority voting, is 64.6% with inter-annotator agreement Krippendorff’s α 0.54. Figure 3 shows the intended-versus-perceived emotion confusion matrix of CREMA-ASIS and that reported from CREMA-D paper. The confusion patterns in our validation closely follow those observed in the orig-inal data. In particular, the neutral and disgust cat-egories remain challenging: emotions with weak acoustic cues are often perceived as neutral and dis-gust is inherently difficult to recognize. In addition, when we listened to samples in which the perceived emotion diverged from the intended emotion of the reference audio, the synthetic and reference au-dio remained acoustically similar. Overall, these results suggest that the TTS system can reliably produce samples with controlled acoustic emotion and semantic sentiment. Perceived Sentiment Score Intended Emotion Category -1 01Angry Disgust Sad Neutral Happy 

Figure 2: Results of subjective acoustic sentiment task. (A) CREMA-ASIS (B) CREMA-D  

> Perceived Category Perceived Category Intended Category Intended Category

Figure 3: Confusion matrices of intended versus per-ceived emotions, showing similar patterns despite ma-trix B being based on audio-visual signals and matrix A on acoustic signals only. B is replotted from Figure 9 in (Cao et al., 2014); fear is excluded to match CREMA-ASIS categories, and numerical values are omitted as they were computed with fear included. Incongruous Congruous Neutral-associated 

> F1 Recall Precision Figure 4: LALM performance across acoustic emotions and semantic sentiment pairs. Each figure label is an abbreviation representing the corresponding acoustic emotion category and semantic sentiment. For example, DIS/POS indicates acoustic disgust and semantic positive.

4.2 LALM Performance Across Acoustic Emotions and Semantic Sentiments 

We examined dual-condition performance of LALMs, including Qwen2-Audio, Kimi-Audio, Audio-Flamingo3, and GPT-audio-mini across acoustic emotion category and semantic sentiment settings (Figure 4). These results demonstrate that incongruous cases pose a significant challenge for existing LALMs, which rarely produce predic-tions in which acoustic and semantic are incon-gruous, resulting in very low recall and, conse-quently, very low F1 scores. Incongruous predic-tions are made only when both acoustic and se-mantic cues are strong, resulting in relatively high precision. Among the four incongruous scenarios, angry–positive performs best, consistent with previ-ous listening results showing the highest accuracy for angry acoustic cues. Compared to incongruous cases, higher recall observed in congruous cases reflects that LALMs are more likely to produce predictions with consistent semantic and acous-tic cues, generally resulting in higher F1 scores across most conditions. As judged by human lis-teners, disgust is the most difficult emotion to iden-tify, probably because its emotion cues are subtle. For neutral-associated conditions, LALMs strug-gle particularly with the semantic-neutral setting, where the acoustic signal carries emotion but the semantic content is neutral. In most such cases, the models ignore the acoustic cues and predict neutral–neutral, suggesting a strong bias toward se-mantic information. Further evidence comes from the acoustic-neutral setting, where models gener-ally achieve higher performance. Overall, results indicate that both acoustic–semantic incongruent cases and semantic-neutral cases are particularly challenging for LALMs. 

4.3 Impact of SFT on LALM Behavior 4.3.1 Layer-wise Acoustic-semantic Probing 

We performed layer-wise linear probing of LALMs before and after SFT. Across all base models (Fig-ure 5, top row), acoustic and semantic probing accuracy diverge with depth: semantic accuracy (green) rises above 85% in deeper layers, while acoustic accuracy (red) drops from approximately 

75% at the Whisper encoder to approximately 

67% (Kimi-Audio, Audio-Flamingo3) and 59% 

(Qwen2-Audio) at the final LLM layer, suggesting a progressive representational shift from acoustic cues to more semantic-oriented features. After SFT (Table 3 and Figure 5, bottom row), acoustic per-formance improves most where base models were weakest, with gains concentrated in later layers. Im-Whis. Proj. L1 L2 L9 L17 L25 L32 

> Layer
> 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(a) Qwen2-Audio (base) Whis. Proj. L1 L2 L7 L14 L21 L28 MIMO  

> Layer
> 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(b) Kimi-Audio (base) Whis. Proj. L1 L2 L7 L14 L21 L28  

> Layer
> 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(c) Audio-Flamingo3 (base) Whis. Proj. L1 L2 L9 L17 L25 L32 

> Layer
> 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(d) Qwen2-Audio-SFT Whis. Proj. L1 L2 L7 L14 L21 L28 MIMO  

> Layer
> 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(e) Kimi-Audio-SFT Whis. Proj. L1 L2 L7 L14 L21 L28  

> Layer
> 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(f) Audio-Flamingo3-SFT 

Figure 5: Layer-wise probing accuracy for acoustic emotion (red) and semantic sentiment (green) across model depth using mean pooling over hidden states. Top row: base models showing acoustic-semantic divergence in deeper layers. Bottom row: SFT models showing reduced divergence with improved acoustic accuracy. 

provements range from 5.3 percentage points (pp) (Kimi-Audio L14) to 17 .4 pp (Qwen2-Audio L25), while early-layer gains remain comparatively mod-est, resulting in more uniform acoustic accuracy throughout layers. Semantic accuracy after SFT remains mostly similar with changes within ±2.5 pp across nearly all layers and models, with a notable exception in Kimi-Audio L28 ( −7.6 pp). As this layer pre-cedes Kimi-Audio’s MIMO module, we hypoth-esize that the additional module introduces a dis-tribution shift (details in Appendix C.2). This ap-pears unique to Kimi-Audio. Since acoustic gains consistently exceed semantic changes (excluding Kimi-Audio L28), the reduced gap ∆G in Table 3 appears driven primarily by improved acoustic pro-cessing rather than semantic degradation. These findings suggest that, after SFT on CREMA-ASIS, acoustic emotion information be-comes more linearly decodable from deeper LLM representations while semantic sentiment remains comparably accessible, leading to a reduced acoustic-semantic gap across layers. Because prob-ing reflects the information available in interme-diate representations rather than the model’s deci-sion process, our analysis provides diagnostic evi-dence that SFT alters the representational balance between acoustic and semantic cues, rather than di-rect evidence about how the model uses these cues. 

Layer ∆Acc acou ↑ ∆Acc sem ↑ ∆G ↓

Qwen2-Audio L1 0.047 -0.004 0.004 L17 0.113 0.005 -0.108 L25 0.174 0.006 -0.168 L32 0.168 0.025 -0.143 Kimi-Audio L1 0.005 -0.002 -0.008 L14 0.053 0.003 -0.050 L28 -0.010 -0.076 -0.067 MIMO 0.023 0.007 -0.016 Audio-Flamingo3 L1 0.040 -0.005 0.034 L14 0.041 0.010 -0.032 L28 0.067 0.023 -0.043 

Table 3: Impact of SFT on layer-wise accuracy and the acoustic-semantic gap G across models. ∆ represents changes (SFT − base). Negative ∆G values indicate reduced gap. 

Complete probing results for mean pooling and last hidden state pooling, as well as analysis of the Kimi-Audio outlier are presented in Appendix C. 

4.3.2 Performance on CREMA-ASIS Test Set 

Table 4 shows the performance of LALMs on CREMA-ASIS test set. Before SFT, Audio-Flamingo3 consistently outperforms others across all evaluated tasks, demonstrating particularly strong semantic understanding. Despite this, all models show difficulty in correctly predicting both semantic and acoustic labels simultaneously, result-ing in low Acc dual . The relatively low Acc acou of GPT-audio-mini may be primarily attributable to frequent audio processing failures. Specifically, the model fails to process 928 out of 5,879 samples, and these cases are treated as incorrect during eval-uation, thereby substantially degrading its overall performance. After SFT, all open-source LALMs exhibit significant performance improvements. To verify whether SFT on CREMA-ASIS affects the models’ original capabilities, we also evaluate tran-scription performance. Results show that WER of the transcription task for LALMs remains sta-ble at approximately 0.07, indicating no noticeable degradation in transcription ability.                        

> Acc acou Acc sem Acc dual
> GPT-audio-mini 0.174 0.716 0.153 Qwen2-Audio 0.356 0.669 0.207 Kimi-Audio 0.421 0.722 0.285 Audio-Flamingo3 0.426 0.780 0.320 Qwen2-Audio-SFT 0.783 0.876 0.683 Kimi-Audio-SFT 0.752 0.896 0.673 Audio-Flamingo3-SFT 0.751 0.902 0.678

Table 4: Performance on CREMA-ASIS test set. 

4.3.3 Evaluation on a Joint Setting 

Unlike the prior section, evaluating LALMs using the same task-specific prompt as in SFT, this as-sesses the model under a joint recognition setting. LALMs are prompted to perform a single task with-out explicit specification of the modality or cue to attend to, aiming to assess whether SFT affects the models’ general emotion and sentiment recog-nition and their robustness to prompts that differ from those used during SFT. In each run, the model is prompted with either “Identify the emotion of the given audio.” or “Identify the sentiment of the given audio.”, without imposing explicit acoustic or semantic constraints. Table 5 reports results on the MELD dataset, showing that emotion recognition performance improves across all models. However, for Audio-Flamingo3, sentiment performance de-creases despite improved emotion recognition, per-haps due to the relatively limited linguistic diversity in CREMA-ASIS constraining a model originally possessing strong semantic understanding.              

> 6The difference between our Kimi scores and those re-ported in the original paper is due to prompt variation: the original study outputs category codes (A, B, C), while we output the actual emotion labels (happy, sad, etc.). Emotion Sentiment Qwen2-Audio 0.518 0.545 Qwen2-Audio-SFT 0.529 0.585
> Kimi-Audio 0.342 60.476 Kimi-Audio-SFT 0.536 0.542
> Audio-Flamingo3 0.517 0.629
> Audio-Flamingo3-SFT 0.532 0.603

Table 5: Performance on the MELD test set (Acc). 

4.3.4 Evaluation on Out-of-domain Dataset 

We evaluate the generalizability of the fine-tuned models on the out-of-domain LISTEN dataset (Ta-ble 6). Results indicate that, after SFT on CREMA-ASIS, both Qwen2-Audio and Audio-Flamingo3 achieve improved acoustic task performance. Per-formance degradation of Kimi-Audio’s Acc acou 

may be attributed to the original Kimi model hav-ing previously been SFT on RAVDESS (Living-stone and Russo, 2018), SAVEE (Jackson and Haq, 2014), and IEMOCAP (Busso et al., 2008) datasets, which also constitute part of the LISTEN evalua-tion data. These were not included during our sub-sequent SFT stage, leading to a shift away from the fitted dataset and thus reduced performance on LISTEN. For the semantic task, SFT Qwen2-Audio also improved semantic performance, while Kimi-Audio and Audio-Flamingo3 decreased. However, we note that Acc sem in Table 6 is reported using the labels provided by the LISTEN dataset, which may not reflect transcript-level sentiment. We pro-vide further analysis of Acc sem for this dataset in Appendix B.              

> Acc acou Acc sem
> Qwen2-Audio 0.515 0.409 Qwen2-Audio-SFT 0.570 0.470
> Kimi-Audio 0.516 0.565
> Kimi-Audio-SFT 0.481 0.330 Audio-Flamingo3 0.607 0.508
> Audio-Flamingo3-SFT 0.620 0.479

Table 6: Evaluation on out-of-domain data. 

5 Conclusion 

We introduce CREMA-ASIS, a synthetic dataset for evaluating LALMs’ bias toward acoustic and semantic affective cues in speech. Subjective tests show that TTS models can reproduce the acoustic emotion of reference audio, enabling controlled speech generation. Using this dataset, we reveal that LALMs struggle with acoustic–semantic in-congruence and exhibit a tendency to underweight acoustic cues when semantic content is neutral. Layer-wise probing analysis shows that deeper lay-ers exhibit reduced acoustic decodability while se-mantic decodability improves, widening the gap between modalities. Fine-tuning on our synthetic data mitigates this by improving the availability of acoustic emotion information in deeper layers while largely preserving semantic sentiment repre-sentations, reducing modality disparity. We hope this work draws attention to the fact that speech may inherently encode distinct acoustic and seman-tic information, and that existing LALMs have lim-ited ability to disentangle the two. We further show that TTS-synthesized data may offer a promising direction to mitigate this limitation. 

Limitations 

Methodology limitations: The primary goal of this study is to provide a baseline evaluation of LALMs on the acoustic–semantic inconsistent task, and certain limitations follow from this scope. While we fine-tune all LALMs under the same SFT hyperparameter settings for fair comparison, we acknowledge that these settings may not be op-timal for each model. Alternative adaptation strate-gies beyond standard SFT could further improve performance but are not the focus of this work. Ad-ditionally, linear probing reveals the accessibility of information in intermediate representations but not whether models use it during inference. 

Dataset quality and evaluation limitations: We acknowledge several limitations of the proposed dataset. First, except for the 150 samples used in the subjective evaluation to verify the TTS model’s ability, the labels correspond to intended rather than perceived emotion, as they are derived from actors who aimed to express specific emotions. In-tended and perceived emotion may diverge, as per-ception can be influenced by both listener subjec-tivity and semantic content. Second, although our listening task, conducted with evaluators blinded to labels and audio references, revealed patterns con-sistent with the original references, our synthetic data may contain imperceptible artifacts that could affect learning. Lastly, two of the three evaluators are co-authors, with the third not being involved in dataset construction. Agreement between the independent annotator and co-authors was consis-tent, but a fully independent panel would further strengthen confidence. 

Generalizability and scope limitations: Our dataset is generated from acted emotion references, which are often exaggerated and easier to iden-tify than spontaneous speech. To assess generaliz-ability, we evaluate SFT models on MELD (TV dialogue) and LISTEN (acted and spontaneous subsets), finding some transferability, but poten-tial limitations remain. Notably, our results show that LALMs struggle with acoustic-semantic incon-sistencies even for synthesized acted speech, so we view this as a necessary first step towards han-dling real-world spontaneous emotion. Although synthetic data can be generated without limit, we observe overfitting before a full epoch, suggest-ing diminishing returns from redundant training samples. Lastly, CREMA-ASIS covers only a sub-set of GoEmotions sentences and basic emotion categories. Future work could increase sentence di-versity and explore additional emotion categories. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health under Grant No. 1R01AG081928-01. We thank other members of the Columbia School of Nursing for their fruitful discussion, including Pallavi Gupta and Zhihong Zhang, as well as mem-bers of VNS Health, including Sasha Vergez and Margaret McDonald. We also thank Amazon Web Services (AWS) for providing computing credits that supported the development of this work. 

References              

> Guillaume Alain and Yoshua Bengio. 2017. Understand-ing intermediate layers using linear classifier probes. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (Workshop Track) .Penelope Brown and Stephen C Levinson. 1987. Polite-ness: Some universals in language usage , volume 4. Cambridge university press. Paweł Bujnowski, Bartłomiej Ku´ zma, Bartłomiej Paziewski, Jacek Rutkowski, Joanna Marhula, Zuzanna Bordzicka, and Piotr Andruszkiewicz. 2024. SAMSEMO: New dataset for multilingual and multi-modal emotion recognition. In Proceedings of Inter-speech , pages 2925–2929. Felix Burkhardt, Astrid Paeschke, Miriam Rolfes, Wal-ter F Sendlmeier, and Benjamin Weiss. 2005. Adatabase of German emotional speech. In Proceed-ings of Interspeech , pages 1517–1520. Carlos Busso, Murtaza Bulut, Chi-Chun Lee, Abe Kazemzadeh, Emily Mower, Samuel Kim, Jean-nette N Chang, Sungbok Lee, and Shrikanth S

Narayanan. 2008. IEMOCAP: Interactive emotional dyadic motion capture database. Language resources and evaluation , 42(4):335–359. Houwei Cao, David G Cooper, Michael K Keutmann, Ruben C Gur, Ani Nenkova, and Ragini Verma. 2014. CREMA-D: Crowd-sourced emotional multimodal actors dataset. IEEE transactions on affective com-puting , 5(4):377–390. Rong Chao, Wen-Huang Cheng, Moreno La Quatra, Sabato Marco Siniscalchi, Chao-Han Huck Yang, Szu-Wei Fu, and Yu Tsao. 2024. An investigation of incorporating Mamba for speech enhancement. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE Spoken Language Technol-ogy Workshop , pages 302–308. IEEE. Jingyi Chen, Zhimeng Guo, Jiyun Chun, Pichao Wang, Andrew Perrault, and Micha Elsner. 2026. Do audio LLMs really listen, or just transcribe? measuring lexical vs. acoustic emotion cues reliance. In Pro-ceedings of the 19th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics , pages 5848–5877. Yunfei Chu, Jin Xu, Qian Yang, Haojie Wei, Xipin Wei, Zhifang Guo, Yichong Leng, Yuanjun Lv, Jinzheng He, Junyang Lin, Chang Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. 2024. Qwen2-audio technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10759 .Pedro Corrêa, João Lima, Victor Moreno, Lucas Ueda, and Paula Dornhofer Paro Costa. 2026. Evaluat-ing emotion recognition in spoken language models on emotionally incongruent speech. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing , pages 17952–17956. Dorottya Demszky, Dana Movshovitz-Attias, Jeongwoo Ko, Alan Cowen, Gaurav Nemade, and Sujith Ravi. 2020. GoEmotions: A dataset of fine-grained emo-tions. In Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 4040–4054. Soham Deshmukh, Benjamin Elizalde, Rita Singh, and Huaming Wang. 2023. Pengi: An audio language model for audio tasks. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 36:18090–18108. Ding Ding, Zeqian Ju, Yichong Leng, Songxiang Liu, Tong Liu, Zeyu Shang, Kai Shen, Wei Song, Xu Tan, Heyi Tang, Zhengtao Wang, Chu Wei, Yifei Xin, Xinran Xu, Jianwei Yu, Yutao Zhang, Xinyu Zhou, Y. Charles, Jun Chen, and 20 others. 2025. Kimi-audio technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.18425 .Quanqi Du, Sofie Labat, Thomas Demeester, and Veronique Hoste. 2025. UniC: a dataset for emo-tion analysis of videos with multimodal and uni-modal labels. Language Resources and Evaluation ,59(3):2857–2892. Zhihao Du, Yuxuan Wang, Qian Chen, Xian Shi, Xiang Lv, Tianyu Zhao, Zhifu Gao, Yexin Yang, Changfeng Gao, Hui Wang, Fan Yu, Huadai Liu, Zhengyan Sheng, Yue Gu, Chong Deng, Wen Wang, Shil-iang Zhang, Zhijie Yan, and Jingren Zhou. 2024. Cosyvoice 2: Scalable streaming speech synthe-sis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10117 .Sreyan Ghosh, Arushi Goel, Jaehyeon Kim, Sonal Ku-mar, Zhifeng Kong, Sang gil Lee, Chao-Han Huck Yang, Ramani Duraiswami, Dinesh Manocha, Rafael Valle, and Bryan Catanzaro. 2025. Audio flamingo 3: Advancing audio intelligence with fully open large audio language models. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems .Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. 2020. The curious case of neural text degeneration. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations .Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In Proceedings of the Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations .Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P. Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, Alek-sander M ˛ adry, Alex Baker-Whitcomb, Alex Beu-tel, Alex Borzunov, Alex Carney, Alex Chow, Alex Kirillov, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, and 399 oth-ers. 2024. GPT-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 .Philip Jackson and Sanaul Haq. 2014. Surrey audio-visual expressed emotion (savee) database. Univer-sity of Surrey: Guildford, UK .Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .Steven R Livingstone and Frank A Russo. 2018. The ryerson audio-visual database of emotional speech and song (RAVDESS): A dynamic, multimodal set of facial and vocal expressions in north american english. PloS one , 13(5):e0196391. Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2017. SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In 

Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations .Reza Lotfian and Carlos Busso. 2017. Building natural-istic emotionally balanced speech corpus by retriev-ing emotional speech from existing podcast record-ings. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing ,10(4):471–483. Sourab Mangrulkar, Sylvain Gugger, Lysandre De-but, Younes Belkada, Sayak Paul, Benjamin Bossan, and Marian Tietz. 2022. PEFT: State-of-the-art parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods. https: //github.com/huggingface/peft .Soujanya Poria, Devamanyu Hazarika, Navonil Ma-jumder, Gautam Naik, Erik Cambria, and Rada Mi-halcea. 2019. MELD: A multimodal multi-party dataset for emotion recognition in conversations. In 

Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics , pages 527–536. Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brock-man, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. 2023. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak super-vision. In Proceedings of the 40th International Con-ference on Machine Learning , pages 28492–28518. Changli Tang, Wenyi Yu, Guangzhi Sun, Xianzhao Chen, Tian Tan, Wei Li, Lu Lu, Zejun Ma, and Chao Zhang. 2024. SALMONN: Towards generic hearing abilities for large language models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .Cheng Wang, Gelei Deng, Xianglin Yang, Han Qiu, and Tianwei Zhang. 2025. When audio and text disagree: Revealing text bias in large audio-language models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 4878–4888. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayi-heng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, and 41 oth-ers. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Shu-wen Yang, Po-Han Chi, Yung-Sung Chuang, Cheng-I Jeff Lai, Kushal Lakhotia, Yist Y Lin, Andy T Liu, Jiatong Shi, Xuankai Chang, Guan-Ting Lin, Tzu-Hsien Huang, Wei-Cheng Tseng, Ko-tik Lee, Da-Rong Liu, Zili Huang, Shuyan Dong, Shang-Wen Li, Shinji Watanabe, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Hung-yi Lee. 2021. SUPERB: Speech process-ing universal performance benchmark. In Proceed-ings of Interspeech , pages 1194–1198. Junchi Yao, Shu Yang, Jianhua Xu, Lijie Hu, Mengdi Li, and Di Wang. 2025. Understanding the repeat curse in large language models from a feature perspective. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 7787–7815. Siyi Zhou, Yiquan Zhou, Yi He, Xun Zhou, Jinchao Wang, Wei Deng, and Jingchen Shu. 2026. In-dextts2: A breakthrough in emotionally expressive and duration-controlled auto-regressive zero-shot text-to-speech. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, pages 35139–35148. 

A Experiment Parameter Settings 

A.1 LALM Prompt 

Figure 6 shows the prompt used for SFT and eval-uation of the LALMs. Notice that the prompt in-cludes the acoustic emotion category fear while it does not appear in our CREMA-ASIS dataset. We found that the fear recordings in CREMA-D often lacked naturalness and failed to convey the in-tended acoustic cues of fear. Therefore, we decided to exclude it from the synthetic dataset. However, we still included the fear category in the prompt be-cause datasets, such as MELD, contain it. This en-sures that our evaluation of MELD remains consis-tent with previous studies, and that the raw LALM performance matches that reported in the original LALM papers. You are an expert in annotation. Analyze the given audio and identify both its **acoustic** emotion and **semantic** sentiment. Definitions: - *Acoustic emotion*: the emotion conveyed by voice, regardless of word meaning or spoken content. - *Semantic sentiment*: the sentiment expressed by the literal meaning of the words, regardless of how they are spoken. Respond strictly in the following JSON format (no explanations, no extra text): { "acoustic_emotion": "<emotion inferred solely from acoustic cues: happy | sad | angry | fear | disgust | surprise | neutral | calm >", "semantic_sentiment": "<sentiment inferred solely from semantic cues: positive | negative | neutral >"} 

Figure 6: LALM prompt, instructing LALM to simulta-neously predict acoustic emotion categories and seman-tic sentiment labels, with acoustic predictions including categories beyond those in CREMA-ASIS. 

A.2 Sentence Selection Prompt 

Figure 7 shows the prompt used for text sentence filtering. Input: a single sentence. Task: Return only two things, separated by a period: a. True or False — depending on whether any of the following conditions are met (1) The sentence does not express a neutral sentiment. (2) The sentence contains content that is strongly racist, very offensive, or inappropriate for public use. (3) The sentence includes words or expressions that people typically would not say aloud (i.e., phrases that exist only in written form). b. If True, also return the reason number (1, 2, or 3) that applies. If True, list all applicable reasons as comma-separated numbers after the period. If False, just return False. Input: 

Figure 7: Prompt for sentence selection, where neu-tral is replaced with positive or negative when filtering sentences with corresponding sentiment. A.3 IndexTTS2 Generation Settings 

Synthetic speech is generated using In-dexTTS2 (Zhou et al., 2026) in a zero-shot, speaker-conditioned setting. For each sample, a reference audio clip from the original CREMA-D corpus is used as the speaker prompt for voice cloning, and the target sentence from the filtered GoEmotions is passed as the text input. The audio clips are preprocessed using SEMamba (Chao et al., 2024) 7 with the vd.pth checkpoint for speech enhancement. We control acoustic emotions solely based on the reference voice and set the emotion vector to all zeros and disable the textual emotion prompt. Standard FP32 precision is used, and all outputs are written as WAV files. 

A.4 Acoustic Filtering settings 

The goal of acoustic filtering with AER is to re-move samples whose conveyed emotion is clearly different from the target emotion. However, the AER model is not perfect and may fail to identify the correct emotion. If we retained only samples whose AER predictions exactly matched the target emotion, many valid samples would be removed even though the synthesized audio conveys an emo-tion similar to the reference audio. For example, sad audio is often identified as neutral by the AER, and it rarely predicts the sad label; even when it does, the audio often does not clearly convey sad emotion. Table 7 shows the target–prediction pairs retained in this study.       

> Audio Reference AER Prediction happy happy, surprised, neutral neutral neutral, angry sad sad, neutral disgust surprised, neutral angry angry, surprised, neutral
> Table 7: Target–prediction pairs retained.

A.5 SFT Parameter Settings 

The models are fine-tuned using a rank-stabilized LoRA (rsLoRA) adapter with rank r = 4 and LoRA α = 32 , applied to all linear layers in the 

CAUSAL_LM setting. We use a learning rate of 

1 × 10 −5 with a gradient accumulation step of 4 with LoRA dropout of 0.1. Checkpoints are saved every 2,500 steps, and the checkpoint achieving the 

> 7https://github.com/RoyChao19477/SEMamba/blob/ main/ckpts/vd.pth

best overall performance is selected. SFT is per-formed on NVIDIA L40, RTX A5500, and A100-40GB GPUs. 

A.6 Layer-wise Linear Probing Training Parameters Settings 

We use the data split from Table 2. We train all lin-ear probes for 20 epochs using Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) with cosine annealing (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017), grid-searching over learning rates 

{5 × 10 −2, 1 × 10 −2, 5 × 10 −3, 1 × 10 −3} eval-uated on the validation set. Each probe consists of a single linear layer and uses input dimensions matching the representation size (1280 for Whis-per, 4096 for Qwen2-Audio, 3584 for Kimi-Audio and Audio-Flamingo3) with output dimensions of 5 and 3 for the acoustic emotion and semantic sen-timent tasks respectively, which corresponds to the categories. We use no hidden layers in any of our probing experiments. 

A.7 LISTEN Dataset Setup 

We split the LISTEN dataset into an acoustic emo-tion analysis subset and a semantic sentiment anal-ysis subset based on the question associated with each sample from the original dataset. A sample is assigned to the acoustic subset if the question asks about emotion conveyed through vocal prosody or tone (e.g., vocal expression, emotional tone of the speaker’s voice), and to the semantic subset if the question asks about emotion conveyed through the literal textual content (e.g., the semantics of the spoken words). The full set of questions used for each subset is listed in Table 8. When constructing the semantic subset, we need to be careful about a property of the LISTEN dataset. LISTEN assigns to each utterance a single emotion label taken from its source corpus, and in conditions where acoustic and lexical cues are treated as aligned, this same label is attached to the text-centric question (i.e., the LISTEN question within our semantic subset) as well. Because these source labels (e.g., in IEMOCAP) were annotated from audio or audiovisual delivery, they encode the emotion of the vocal performance rather than the semantics from the transcript alone. We further discuss the consequences of this in Appendix B. For the semantic analysis, we map the resulting labels to positive, negative, and neutral sentiment following Table 9, and exclude samples with am-biguous mappings. Acoustic Emotion Analysis Semantic Sentiment Analysis      

> What emotion is communicated through the speaker’s vocal prosody? Based solely on the text content, what emotion would you identify? Based on the vocal expression, what emotion is the speaker feeling? From the semantic content alone, what emotion is being expressed? How would you describe the emotional tone of the speaker? What emotional tone is conveyed by the literal meaning of this statement? Listening to the voice, what emotion is being expressed? What feeling is suggested by the meaning of these words? What emotion is expressed in the speaker’s voice? Based on the content of this text, what emotion would the person likely be feeling? What emotional state is reflected in the speaker’s voice? Reading this text, what emotional state does the speaker appear to be in? What emotion does the speaker convey through their tone? What emotion is conveyed by the words in this statement?

Table 8: Questions used to split LISTEN samples into acoustic emotion analysis and semantic sentiment analysis subsets.     

> Sentiment Original Labels positive amusement, excitement, happiness, happy, pleasantly surprised negative anger, angry, annoyance, anxious, concern, concerned, confusion, contempt, disappoint-ment, disgust, fear, frustration, ridicule, sad, sadness neutral calm, neutral

Table 9: Semantic sentiment label mapping from the LISTEN dataset to our setting. 

B Supplementary Analysis of LISTEN Dataset 

In Section 4.3.4, we observed low Acc sem on LIS-TEN, and reduced Acc sem after SFT for Kimi-Audio and Audio-Flamingo3, when scored against the labels provided by LISTEN. Upon manual in-spection, this behavior appears to stem primarily from how LISTEN’s labels are constructed rather than from the models themselves. LISTEN assigns each utterance a single emotion label taken from its source corpus, and attaches this label to the text-centric (“semantic”) question as well. For corpora such as IEMOCAP, these labels were annotated from audio or audiovisual delivery, so for utter-ances whose transcript’s sentiment is neutral or divergent from the vocal delivery, the text-centric label reflects the acoustic emotion rather than the sentiment expressed by the transcript. This makes these labels unsuitable targets for a purely text-based sentiment task. Several examples within the “Matched-Emotion” for text setting (LISTEN’s experiment type 2A) il-lustrate this mismatch. The transcript “Somebody please call 911” paired with the question “What emotion is conveyed by the words in this state-ment?” is labeled happiness , whereas the words alone convey distress or concern rather than the positive sentiment the label implies. Furthermore, “I would’ve loved to” and “As a matter of fact, that’s perfectly true” are labeled sadness and anger re-spectively, while in both cases the text alone reads more neutral-to-positive. Rather than annotation er-rors, these examples are labeled based on the deliv-ered acoustic emotions while being associated with a text-centric question under the assumption that lexical and acoustic emotional cues match. How-ever, for these examples, the assumption does not hold, and the text-centric label and the transcript’s semantic sentiment diverge. To quantify this divergence, we feed the tran-scripts of the audios alone to a strong text-only classifier, Qwen3-32B (Yang et al., 2025), and compare its semantic sentiment predictions against LISTEN’s text-centric labels using the mapping in Table 9. We treat Qwen3-32B’s predictions here as a proxy-label for transcript sentiment, not as ground truth. On the three transcript examples above, Qwen3-32B predicts negative, positive, and positive, consistent with what a reader would in-fer from the transcript alone. However, across the full semantic subset (651 samples), Qwen3-32B’s predictions agree with LISTEN’s labels on only 36.9% of samples. This low agreement sug-gests that the text-centric labels encode acoustic affect rather than lexical. When we instead score the three LALMs’ semantic predictions from Ta-ble 6 (which were inferred from the audio ) against Qwen3-32B’s text-only transcript-level predictions (see Table 10), their agreement with transcript-level sentiment is substantially higher than against LIS-TEN’s labels. This effect is most pronounced for Kimi-Audio, whose agreement increases after SFT on CREMA-ASIS (0.594 to 0.731), with smaller increases for Qwen2-Audio (0.622 to 0.662) and Audio-Flamingo3 (0.711 to 0.720). Notably, Kimi-Audio’s semantic score moves in opposite direc-tions depending only on the scoring reference. It drops under LISTEN’s labels but rises under transcript-level references, even though the model’s predictions are identical. While our results suggest that SFT improves the models’ alignment with transcript-level sentiment rather than degrading it, establishing a true seman-tic sentiment gold-label would require manual hu-man annotation of the dataset, which we leave to future work. Therefore, we treat the weaker LIS-TEN Acc sem in Table 6 with caution.       

> Agreement with Qwen3-32B Qwen2-Audio 0.622 Qwen2-Audio-SFT 0.662
> Kimi-Audio 0.594 Kimi-Audio-SFT 0.731
> Audio-Flamingo3 0.711 Audio-Flamingo3-SFT 0.720
> Table 10: Agreement between each LALM’s seman-tic predictions from audio inputs and Qwen3-32B’s transcript-level sentiment predictions on LISTEN, be-fore and after SFT on our CREMA-ASIS. Note that this is a reference-agreement measure, not accuracy against verified ground truth.

C Supplementary Layer-Wise Probing Results 

C.1 Complete Probing Results 

Table 11 shows the complete results of our layer-wise probing experiments across three models. In addition to the changes between base and SFT mod-els (columns denoted with ∆), we also report the acoustic emotion ( Acc base acou , Acc SFT acou ), semantic sen-timent accuracies ( Acc base sem , Acc SFT sem ), and acoustic-semantic gaps ( Gbase , G SFT ) for each layer probed across base and SFT models. Table 11 also presents the same experiment us-ing the last hidden state as features in place of mean pooled hidden states while Figure 8 shows the layer-wise trajectories for both acoustic emotion and se-mantic sentiment accuracies. We observe similar behavior for the last hidden state pooling as mean pooling: for base models, the acoustic-semantic gap widens the deeper we propagate through the layers as acoustic accuracies decrease while seman-tic accuracies increase. Similar to before, we ob-serve that SFT improves the acoustic emotion accu-racy the most where the base models performed the worst while the changes are modest in earlier lay-ers, leading to more uniform acoustic performance throughout the layers. Again, semantic accuracy changes comparatively less with SFT, leading to gap reductions being largely driven by acoustic gains. 

C.2 Kimi-Audio L28 Analysis 

To further investigate the accuracy drop of Kimi-Audio L28 from Section 4.3.1, we extend our prob-ing experiment to layers 22–28 of Kimi-Audio’s LLM backbone and layers 1–5 of the MIMO mod-ule. We run all experiments with 5 different ran-dom seeds and present the mean accuracies in Ta-ble 12 and Figure 9. We omit reporting standard deviations as they are all < 0.005 . For the base model, we see a steady decrease in acoustic ac-curacy through each layer of the LLM backbone followed by a sharp increase at the MIMO mod-ule, reaching levels comparable to early LLM lay-ers. The same pattern can be observed for the SFT model, but this time, the drop at Kimi-Audio L28 is significantly sharper. Since the LLM backbone was initially pre-trained on text-only tasks, we hypothe-size that there is a distribution mismatch between it and the MIMO module (consisting of a 1B audio transformers), which leads SFT to exacerbate the mismatch. We leave further investigation for future work. Similar to Kimi-Audio L28, we also observe dips in accuracy with the last hidden state pooling for Qwen2-Audio L1, Kimi-Audio Projector (Table 11 and Figure 8) and Kimi-Audio MIMO 2 (Table 12 and Figure 9) at a much larger magnitude. For Qwen2-Audio L1 and Kimi-Audio Projector, SFT has no effect on the accuracy, while for Kimi-Audio L28 and MIMO 2 SFT either reduce the accuracy or barely increase it by 0.2 percentage points. While not conclusive, we note that all drops happen at the very start or end of the LLM layers, which may indicate domain mismatches between the modules. We leave further investigation for future work. Layer Pooling Acc base acou Acc base sem Gbase Acc SFT acou Acc SFT sem GSFT ∆Acc acou ↑ ∆Acc sem ↑ ∆G ↓

Qwen2-Audio Whisper Mean 0.754 0.687 0.067 0.779 0.671 0.108 0.025 -0.016 0.041 Projector Mean 0.752 0.687 0.065 0.780 0.670 0.111 0.028 -0.017 0.046 L1 Mean 0.725 0.748 0.023 0.772 0.744 0.027 0.047 -0.004 0.004 L2 Mean 0.721 0.749 0.029 0.780 0.747 0.032 0.059 -0.002 0.004 L9 Mean 0.716 0.822 0.106 0.775 0.820 0.044 0.059 -0.002 -0.062 L17 Mean 0.667 0.863 0.196 0.780 0.867 0.087 0.113 0.005 -0.108 L25 Mean 0.603 0.845 0.242 0.777 0.851 0.074 0.174 0.006 -0.168 L32 Mean 0.587 0.809 0.223 0.754 0.835 0.080 0.168 0.025 -0.143 Whisper Last 0.750 0.625 0.126 0.762 0.599 0.163 0.012 -0.025 0.037 Projector Last 0.747 0.623 0.124 0.765 0.595 0.170 0.018 -0.028 0.046 L1 Last 0.246 0.358 0.112 0.246 0.358 0.112 0.000 0.000 0.000 L2 Last 0.616 0.641 0.025 0.772 0.659 0.113 0.156 0.018 0.088 L9 Last 0.693 0.754 0.061 0.781 0.799 0.019 0.087 0.045 -0.043 L17 Last 0.606 0.858 0.251 0.783 0.870 0.087 0.177 0.012 -0.164 L25 Last 0.579 0.856 0.277 0.785 0.865 0.080 0.207 0.009 -0.198 L32 Last 0.528 0.820 0.292 0.770 0.868 0.098 0.242 0.048 -0.194 Kimi-Audio Whisper Mean 0.756 0.804 0.048 0.756 0.804 0.048 0.000 0.000 0.000 Projector Mean 0.745 0.787 0.042 0.746 0.788 0.042 0.001 0.001 0.000 L1 Mean 0.763 0.807 0.043 0.769 0.805 0.036 0.005 -0.002 -0.008 L2 Mean 0.752 0.816 0.064 0.759 0.809 0.050 0.007 -0.007 -0.015 L7 Mean 0.725 0.863 0.138 0.753 0.858 0.105 0.028 -0.005 -0.033 L14 Mean 0.699 0.879 0.180 0.752 0.882 0.130 0.053 0.003 -0.050 L21 Mean 0.718 0.866 0.148 0.748 0.885 0.137 0.030 0.019 -0.011 L28 Mean 0.675 0.850 0.175 0.665 0.773 0.108 -0.010 -0.076 -0.067 MIMO Mean 0.736 0.867 0.131 0.758 0.873 0.115 0.023 0.007 -0.016 Whisper Last 0.753 0.718 0.035 0.753 0.718 0.035 0.000 0.000 0.000 Projector Last 0.247 0.366 0.120 0.247 0.366 0.120 0.000 0.000 0.000 L1 Last 0.750 0.784 0.034 0.759 0.780 0.021 0.008 -0.004 -0.012 L2 Last 0.755 0.788 0.033 0.753 0.771 0.018 -0.001 -0.017 -0.015 L7 Last 0.752 0.806 0.053 0.758 0.801 0.043 0.005 -0.005 -0.010 L14 Last 0.719 0.837 0.118 0.747 0.767 0.020 0.028 -0.070 -0.098 L21 Last 0.707 0.854 0.147 0.756 0.861 0.105 0.049 0.007 -0.042 L28 Last 0.703 0.827 0.125 0.752 0.837 0.085 0.050 0.010 -0.040 MIMO Last 0.710 0.854 0.144 0.752 0.859 0.107 0.043 0.005 -0.038 Audio-Flamingo3 Whisper Mean 0.751 0.676 0.075 0.776 0.673 0.103 0.025 -0.003 0.028 Projector Mean 0.726 0.610 0.115 0.754 0.588 0.166 0.029 -0.022 0.051 L1 Mean 0.730 0.735 0.005 0.770 0.731 0.039 0.040 -0.005 0.034 L2 Mean 0.725 0.742 0.017 0.768 0.743 0.025 0.043 0.001 0.008 L7 Mean 0.726 0.823 0.098 0.770 0.823 0.053 0.044 0.000 -0.044 L14 Mean 0.723 0.855 0.132 0.764 0.865 0.101 0.041 0.010 -0.032 L21 Mean 0.699 0.858 0.159 0.759 0.871 0.112 0.060 0.013 -0.047 L28 Mean 0.666 0.825 0.159 0.732 0.848 0.115 0.067 0.023 -0.043 Whisper Last 0.753 0.637 0.116 0.775 0.640 0.135 0.022 0.003 0.020 Projector Last 0.696 0.525 0.171 0.746 0.524 0.223 0.051 -0.001 0.051 L1 Last 0.614 0.637 0.023 0.740 0.625 0.115 0.126 -0.011 0.092 L2 Last 0.652 0.690 0.038 0.755 0.677 0.078 0.103 -0.013 0.041 L7 Last 0.705 0.792 0.087 0.763 0.787 0.024 0.058 -0.004 -0.062 L14 Last 0.682 0.827 0.145 0.762 0.855 0.093 0.080 0.027 -0.053 L21 Last 0.692 0.861 0.168 0.765 0.890 0.125 0.073 0.030 -0.043 L28 Last 0.678 0.830 0.152 0.755 0.859 0.104 0.078 0.030 -0.048 

Table 11: Layer-wise acoustic emotion accuracy Acc acou , semantic sentiment accuracy Acc sem , and acoustic-semantic gap G between base and SFT LALMs from linear probing experiments. ∆ represents changes (SFT −base). Negative 

∆G values indicate reduced gap. Whis. Proj. L1 L2 L9 L17 L25 L32 

> Layer
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(a) Qwen2-Audio (base) Whis. Proj. L1 L2 L7 L14 L21 L28 MIMO  

> Layer
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(b) Kimi-Audio (base) Whis. Proj. L1 L2 L7 L14 L21 L28  

> Layer
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(c) Audio-Flamingo3 (base) Whis. Proj. L1 L2 L9 L17 L25 L32 

> Layer
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(d) Qwen2-Audio-SFT Whis. Proj. L1 L2 L7 L14 L21 L28 MIMO  

> Layer
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(e) Kimi-Audio-SFT Whis. Proj. L1 L2 L7 L14 L21 L28  

> Layer
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(f) Audio-Flamingo3-SFT 

Figure 8: Layer-wise probing accuracy for acoustic emotion (red) and semantic sentiment (green) across model depth using the last hidden states. Top row: base models showing acoustic-semantic divergence in deeper layers. Bottom row: SFT models showing reduced divergence with improved acoustic accuracy. L22 L23 L24 L25 L26 L27 L28 MIMO 1 MIMO 2 MIMO 3 MIMO 4 MIMO 5 

> Layer
> 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(a) Kimi-Audio (base) L22 L23 L24 L25 L26 L27 L28 MIMO 1 MIMO 2 MIMO 3 MIMO 4 MIMO 5  

> Layer
> 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
> Test Accuracy
> Acoustic Semantic

(b) Kimi-Audio (Fine-tuned) 

Figure 9: Layer-wise probing accuracy for acoustic emotion (red) and semantic sentiment (green) across model depth using the mean pooling for Kimi-Audio’s late LLM layers and MIMO module. Left: base models. Right: SFT models. Accuracies are computed based on means from five runs with different random seeds. 

Kimi-Audio Layer Acc base acou Acc base sem Gbase Acc SFT acou Acc SFT sem GSFT ∆Acc acou ↑ ∆Acc sem ↑ ∆G ↓

L22 0.710 0.878 0.168 0.753 0.879 0.126 0.043 0.001 -0.042 L23 0.710 0.872 0.162 0.750 0.880 0.130 0.041 0.009 -0.032 L24 0.693 0.865 0.172 0.748 0.878 0.131 0.055 0.014 -0.042 L25 0.691 0.866 0.176 0.748 0.869 0.121 0.057 0.003 -0.054 L26 0.691 0.868 0.177 0.744 0.857 0.113 0.054 -0.011 -0.065 L27 0.682 0.859 0.177 0.733 0.849 0.116 0.052 -0.010 -0.062 L28 0.676 0.851 0.174 0.654 0.780 0.126 -0.022 -0.070 -0.048 MIMO 1 0.735 0.865 0.130 0.759 0.874 0.116 0.024 0.009 -0.014 MIMO 2 0.236 0.459 0.223 0.238 0.366 0.128 0.002 -0.093 -0.095 MIMO 3 0.746 0.840 0.094 0.759 0.855 0.097 0.013 0.016 0.003 MIMO 4 0.738 0.825 0.087 0.757 0.841 0.084 0.019 0.016 -0.003 MIMO 5 0.736 0.863 0.128 0.759 0.873 0.114 0.024 0.010 -0.014 

Table 12: Layer-wise acoustic emotion accuracy Acc acou , semantic sentiment accuracy Acc sem , and acoustic-semantic gap G between base and SFT LALMs from linear probing experiments. ∆ represents changes (SFT −base). Negative 

∆G values indicate reduced gap. Numbers are computed based on means from five runs with different random seeds.